introduction/overview/problem-and-the-solution.md, before:

---
description: >-
  We've set out to solve problems that will shape the landscape of crypto,
  blockchain, the internet and the world as we know it. We're starting by
  amplifying the impact of Layer 1 and Layer 2 chains.
---

# Problem and the Solution

### A Commitment To Fight For Decentralized World

In our [mission](the-ferrum-network-mission.md), we described the problems faced by the industry at a high level. Now we'll dive deeper into core problems that are standing in the way of true decentralization becoming mainstream.

### Outline

1. Why decentralization is important
2. Understanding why chains succeed
3. Why developability is critically important
4. Why decentralization doesn't stand a chance unless interoperability is normalized
5. Purpose-built chains vs general purpose
6. Our interoperability solution.

### Why decentralization is important?

Decentralization is a core component of a properly implemented [Trustless system](https://www.gemini.com/cryptopedia/trustless-meaning-blockchain-non-custodial-smart-contracts#section-whom-do-you-trust). If an element of centralization exists, inherently trust must be placed in the centralized entity responsible for the centralized part of the system. Such conditions and elements of centralization violate the foundational principle and ethos of crypto and blockchain technology at large.&#x20;

In an attempt to solve problems of interoperability, many cross-chain solutions have introduced elements of centralization such as burn and mint, wrapped tokens, etc into the ecosystem. These implementations continue to bring elevated levels of risk to an area of crypto that is already plagued with security concerns.

We believe decentralization must remain a fundamental component of any lasting interoperability solution. This is why our architectural approach relies on the native chain's consensus instead of relying on relay chain or off-chain solutions rampant in the market today.

### Understanding why chains succeed

Over a thousand chains have launched in the last few years. A large majority have been replicas of Ethereum utilizing the Ethereum Virtual Machine and Ethereum's robust documented and standardized [EIP](https://ethereum.org/en/eips/) (Ethereum Improvement Proposals) process. If you look at some of the most successful touring complete examples such as Ethereum, Polygon, BSC, Avalanche, and many more you'll notice a theme of EVM compatibility.&#x20;

#### Why does this matter and how does this relate to the success of a chain?

I'm sure we have all heard the quote:

> Immitation is the greatest form of flattery

When you review the slew of EVM compatible chains and their success an underlying pattern emerges. To better understand the pattern you have to dive a bit deeper toward the inception of EVM itself and the transformation of Ethereum through the introduction of EIPs.&#x20;

{% embed url="https://youtu.be/X6mhXp4x2mo" %}
Ethereum commit history influx around EIP introduction
{% endembed %}

In the web2 world, there are established standards that enable developers and contributors to engage with, enhance and further improve a protocol. Standards such as RFC for the domain name system (DNS), and design patterns such as MVC among others have empowered developers to speak the same language across organizations and nurtured a thriving environment of contribution and improvement.&#x20;

When it comes to touring complete implementations in web3, EIPs were the first successful attempt at bringing these standards to the web3 world.

This resulted in an influx of developers building on and contributing to the Ethereum chain. Further, these standards created a stable foundation for EVM-compatible forked layer 1 and layer 2 networks to launch.&#x20;

While there are other factors that contributed to Ethereum's success and the success of EVM-compatible networks, a focus on developability was by far the largest contributor. [– Click to Tweet](https://ctt.ac/b506B)

### Why developability is critically important?

Looking back at the overwhelming success of Apple's ecosystem of success through the launch of its App Store in 2008, followed by Google's success with the Android Marketplace Launch (Later Google Play) we can see another pattern. It's essential to prioritize builders, builder tools, incentives, and pain point resolution. This applies even in industrial sectors. If you look at the Carnegie Steel empire through US Steel and what it did for builders. These refinements and a focus on making it easy for builders to create solutions resulted in the creation of gargantuan economies.  In the 1900s, skyscrapers pioneered vertical spaces and made New York into a multigenerational global icon. At the turn of the millennia, it was mobile applications that revolutionized how billions live their life daily.&#x20;

Ethereum brought this focus to web3 with its mission to create a touring complete language, and its focus on standardization through the EIP process. This same concept is what keeps other layer 1 networks from gaining traction. Many networks are failing at the core requirement of making it easy for builders to develop solutions, dApps, and enhancements on their network. When builders are not incentivized to create solutions, the ecosystem of viable dApps, protocols, and solutions on the given chain remains lackluster making it near impossible for a chain to gain traction.

> At Ferrum, developability and developer-friendly solutions, processes and features are our superpowers. We know that we must attract builders, solve their pain points and give them a playground to realize their imagination with no limits. This is what we've set out to do with our networks.
>
> _**Taha Abbasi, CTO at Ferrum Network**_
>
> [Click to Tweet](https://ctt.ac/bTcG2)

### Why decentralization doesn't stand a chance unless interoperability is normalized

The absence of interoperability standards for development will continue to serve as one of the biggest obstacles to true decentralization in a multi-chain world. We are seeing significant interest and resource allocation by builders, investors, and communities toward building multi-chain infrastructure and solutions. Each builder is utilizing its own approach to solve the interoperability problem. From off-chain workers and permissioned relay chains to plasma and side chains. The solutions and interoperability protocols, data structures, APIs, libraries, and methodologies vary across each of them.&#x20;

This is a natural occurrence, and perhaps it warrants encouragement as such a fluid approach favors speed and innovation over rigid structures. However, when everyone keeps creating new standards, these chains are unable to actually communicate with each other in a meaningful way without having to reinvent the wheel every time you want to build a multi-chain solution.

Ferrum is introducing the BIS and BIP mechanisms to solve this problem and bring standardization to blockchain interoperability.

{% content-ref url="../../architecture/standards/bis-blockchain-interoperability-standards.md" %}
[bis-blockchain-interoperability-standards.md](../../architecture/standards/bis-blockchain-interoperability-standards.md)
{% endcontent-ref %}

{% content-ref url="../../architecture/standards/bip-blockchain-interoperability-proposals.md" %}
[bip-blockchain-interoperability-proposals.md](../../architecture/standards/bip-blockchain-interoperability-proposals.md)
{% endcontent-ref %}

### Purpose-built chains vs general purpose



### Our interoperability solution



### Removing Barriers to Mass Adoption of Crypto

Ferrum Network is designed to remove barriers to the mass adoption of crypto and the underlying technologies that power the industry. Ferrum Network was born in the bear market to provide solutions that provide tremendous value regardless of the market cycle to projects operating across networks.&#x20;

### Ferrum Network Origins and Why the Name Ferrum

The name Ferrum is the Latin term for Iron. We chose the name Ferrum due to Iron's ability to fuse with and form a limitless variety of materials essential for the sustenance of life itself. We feel our mission is homogeneous to these characteristics of element 26. At Ferrum Network, we are building solutions that conform to various complex protocols, many of which have nothing in common except for their interoperability with Ferrum Network.

### Interoperability by Design

Ferrum Network's sophisticated solutions simplify the complexity of building a multi-chain solution and give developers and project owners a single entry point to every recognizable chain and network in the industry. We have thought about the pain points that arise when implementing interoperability as an afterthought in a multi-network / multi-chain world. With an ever-growing list of new EVM and non-EVM compatible chains coming to market, gaining traction, and providing value to segments of the global crypto audience, interoperability has become a core value for most projects. At Ferrum Network, we design from the ground up for interoperability.

### **Developability — Making life easier for developers**

> “Although developability is critical for blockchain platforms, it is not often discussed. We think about usability a lot when we talk about product design, however for application platforms developability is the most important thing to attract developers to get apps built and put onto the platform.” **** — [@Polkadot](https://twitter.com/polkadotnetwork)&#x20;
>
> Source: [How Polkadot tackles the biggest problems facing blockchain innovators](https://link.medium.com/o1goC1nazlb)

#### Why Should You Care?

As a developer, you no longer need to figure out architectural problems that come from launching your dApp, game, or metaverse on an EVM-compatible network like Polygon and providing seamless integration to a non-EVM compatible network like Solana.

Build the core solution on Ferrum Network and leave the complexity of seamless multi-chain integration to the underlying technology. Ferrum Network lets you implement interactions that enable the multi-chain transfer of value, data, and functional components. All of this is compiled and presented to the end-users in a seamless experience.

Ferrum Network's sophisticated interoperability protocols allow you to engage audiences across the spectrum regardless of their core stack, consensus mechanism, or runtime environment. As a developer, you can accomplish this without having to learn about the nuances of deploying your dApp or game on each of these individual networks. Gain mastery over one protocol, Ferrum Network, and access every network where your audience natively engages.

## Old

The name Ferrum is the Latin term for Iron. We chose the name Ferrum due to Iron's ability to fuse with and form a limitless variety of materials essential for the sustenance of life itself. We feel our mission is homogeneous to these characteristics of element 26.  At Ferrum Network we are building solutions that conform to a variety of complex protocols, many of which have nothing in common except for their interoperability with Ferrum Network.

Teams building solutions today are regularly forced to compromise on the benefits of a truly multi-network ecosystem. Even projects that have deployed their token, and dApps on multiple networks continue to have a siloed experience for their community, holders, and development process.

Polkadot's architecture of a primary relay chain with interconnected parachains solves the infrastructure side of this problem for those within the Polkadot ecosystem. However, for everyone else not part of the Polkadot ecosystem, there is still no viable solution. Ferrum Network is able to solve the problem of interoperability of value and data for any network, including parachains, EVM compatible networks, non-EVM compatible networks, or any other variation in the future.

Commit message:

GitBook: [#37] Purpose built vs general purpose

introduction/overview/problem-and-the-solution.md, after:

---
description: >-
  We've set out to solve problems that will shape the landscape of crypto,
  blockchain, the internet and the world as we know it. We're starting by
  amplifying the impact of Layer 1 and Layer 2 chains.
---

# Problem and the Solution

### A Commitment To Fight For Decentralized World

In our [mission](the-ferrum-network-mission.md), we described the problems faced by the industry at a high level. Now we'll dive deeper into core problems that are standing in the way of true decentralization becoming mainstream.

### Outline

1. Why decentralization is important
2. Understanding why chains succeed
3. Why developability is critically important
4. Why decentralization doesn't stand a chance unless interoperability is normalized
5. Purpose-built chains vs general purpose
6. Our interoperability solution.

### Why decentralization is important?

Decentralization is a core component of a properly implemented [Trustless system](https://www.gemini.com/cryptopedia/trustless-meaning-blockchain-non-custodial-smart-contracts#section-whom-do-you-trust). If an element of centralization exists, inherently trust must be placed in the centralized entity responsible for the centralized part of the system. Such conditions and elements of centralization violate the foundational principle and ethos of crypto and blockchain technology at large.&#x20;

In an attempt to solve problems of interoperability, many cross-chain solutions have introduced elements of centralization such as burn and mint, wrapped tokens, etc into the ecosystem. These implementations continue to bring elevated levels of risk to an area of crypto that is already plagued with security concerns.

We believe decentralization must remain a fundamental component of any lasting interoperability solution. This is why our architectural approach relies on the native chain's consensus instead of relying on relay chain or off-chain solutions rampant in the market today.

### Understanding why chains succeed

Over a thousand chains have launched in the last few years. A large majority have been replicas of Ethereum utilizing the Ethereum Virtual Machine and Ethereum's robust documented and standardized [EIP](https://ethereum.org/en/eips/) (Ethereum Improvement Proposals) process. If you look at some of the most successful touring complete examples such as Ethereum, Polygon, BSC, Avalanche, and many more you'll notice a theme of EVM compatibility.&#x20;

#### Why does this matter and how does this relate to the success of a chain?

I'm sure we have all heard the quote:

> Immitation is the greatest form of flattery

When you review the slew of EVM compatible chains and their success an underlying pattern emerges. To better understand the pattern you have to dive a bit deeper toward the inception of EVM itself and the transformation of Ethereum through the introduction of EIPs.&#x20;

{% embed url="https://youtu.be/X6mhXp4x2mo" %}
Ethereum commit history influx around EIP introduction
{% endembed %}

In the web2 world, there are established standards that enable developers and contributors to engage with, enhance and further improve a protocol. Standards such as RFC for the domain name system (DNS), and design patterns such as MVC among others have empowered developers to speak the same language across organizations and nurtured a thriving environment of contribution and improvement.&#x20;

When it comes to touring complete implementations in web3, EIPs were the first successful attempt at bringing these standards to the web3 world.

This resulted in an influx of developers building on and contributing to the Ethereum chain. Further, these standards created a stable foundation for EVM-compatible forked layer 1 and layer 2 networks to launch.&#x20;

While there are other factors that contributed to Ethereum's success and the success of EVM-compatible networks, a focus on developability was by far the largest contributor. [– Click to Tweet](https://ctt.ac/b506B)

### Why developability is critically important?

Looking back at the overwhelming success of Apple's ecosystem of success through the launch of its App Store in 2008, followed by Google's success with the Android Marketplace Launch (Later Google Play) we can see another pattern. It's essential to prioritize builders, builder tools, incentives, and pain point resolution. This applies even in industrial sectors. If you look at the Carnegie Steel empire through US Steel and what it did for builders. These refinements and a focus on making it easy for builders to create solutions resulted in the creation of gargantuan economies.  In the 1900s, skyscrapers pioneered vertical spaces and made New York into a multigenerational global icon. At the turn of the millennia, it was mobile applications that revolutionized how billions live their life daily.&#x20;

Ethereum brought this focus to web3 with its mission to create a touring complete language, and its focus on standardization through the EIP process. This same concept is what keeps other layer 1 networks from gaining traction. Many networks are failing at the core requirement of making it easy for builders to develop solutions, dApps, and enhancements on their network. When builders are not incentivized to create solutions, the ecosystem of viable dApps, protocols, and solutions on the given chain remains lackluster making it near impossible for a chain to gain traction.

> At Ferrum, developability and developer-friendly solutions, processes and features are our superpowers. We know that we must attract builders, solve their pain points and give them a playground to realize their imagination with no limits. This is what we've set out to do with our networks.
>
> _**Taha Abbasi, CTO at Ferrum Network**_
>
> [Click to Tweet](https://ctt.ac/bTcG2)

### Why decentralization doesn't stand a chance unless interoperability is normalized

The absence of interoperability standards for development will continue to serve as one of the biggest obstacles to true decentralization in a multi-chain world. We are seeing significant interest and resource allocation by builders, investors, and communities toward building multi-chain infrastructure and solutions. Each builder is utilizing its own approach to solve the interoperability problem. From off-chain workers and permissioned relay chains to plasma and side chains. The solutions and interoperability protocols, data structures, APIs, libraries, and methodologies vary across each of them.&#x20;

This is a natural occurrence, and perhaps it warrants encouragement as such a fluid approach favors speed and innovation over rigid structures. However, when everyone keeps creating new standards, these chains are unable to actually communicate with each other in a meaningful way without having to reinvent the wheel every time you want to build a multi-chain solution.

Ferrum is introducing the BIS and BIP mechanisms to solve this problem and bring standardization to blockchain interoperability.

{% content-ref url="../../architecture/standards/bis-blockchain-interoperability-standards.md" %}
[bis-blockchain-interoperability-standards.md](../../architecture/standards/bis-blockchain-interoperability-standards.md)
{% endcontent-ref %}

{% content-ref url="../../architecture/standards/bip-blockchain-interoperability-proposals.md" %}
[bip-blockchain-interoperability-proposals.md](../../architecture/standards/bip-blockchain-interoperability-proposals.md)
{% endcontent-ref %}

### Purpose-built chains vs general purpose

Since the inception of the Ethereum Virtual Machine, there has been an overwhelming interest in creating general-purpose blockchains. Most of these chains hope to solve the problems of scalability faced by Ethereum. With crypto hype in the bull market, these chains gained a ton of traction and built treasuries to continue development for some time. However, with hundreds of general purpose blockchains in the market, and thousands more that failed, it's become abundantly clear that general purpose chains are no longer the way of the future. Polkadot, Ethereum, Polygon, BSC, and other major players have cornered this space.&#x20;

This leads us to the next wave in blockchain development, purpose-built blockchains. These chains are being developed to solve a specific problem. From decentralized computing resources and storage to the financial settlement of assets between crypto and fiat worlds. Chains like Algorand are dedicated to financial settlement while chains like Cudos are dedicated to solving the decentralized cloud computing problem.

In the future, the web3 world will work similarly to how system design works in the web2 world today. For example, when designing web2 applications, we start defining the requirements of the application first, then determine the best systems to realize those functional and non-functional requirements. We don't restrict our application requirements based on the underlying systems for computing, storage, and settlement services.&#x20;

Building solutions in today's blockchains is analogous to restricting your application features by the limitations of the underlying systems that will power them. So if you are building on Ethereum, you are automatically limited to processing transactions per the Ethereum block time of about 10 to 20 seconds per block. Building an application that needs to process thousands of transactions per second is out of the question with such limitations. So your options are limited to working with a network with faster block times, such as BSC with an average block time of 3 seconds. What if you like Ethereum's security better, but need the speed of BSC? In the web2 world, we are able to cherry-pick solutions to fit these exact needs. For example, you can use AWS for cloud computing, hosting, load balancing, Stripe for payment settlement, and a slew of other solutions for specific use cases of your application. The web3 world falls short in this area.&#x20;

> Although purpose-built blockchains are the future, they cannot succeed without a scalable, secure, stable, and easy-to-deploy interoperability layer with standardized integration procedures.
>
> _**Taha Abbasi, CTO at Ferrum Network**_
>
> [Click to Tweet](https://ctt.ac/Eld3q)

### Our interoperability solution



### Removing Barriers to Mass Adoption of Crypto

Ferrum Network is designed to remove barriers to the mass adoption of crypto and the underlying technologies that power the industry. Ferrum Network was born in the bear market to provide solutions that provide tremendous value regardless of the market cycle to projects operating across networks.&#x20;

### Ferrum Network Origins and Why the Name Ferrum

The name Ferrum is the Latin term for Iron. We chose the name Ferrum due to Iron's ability to fuse with and form a limitless variety of materials essential for the sustenance of life itself. We feel our mission is homogeneous to these characteristics of element 26. At Ferrum Network, we are building solutions that conform to various complex protocols, many of which have nothing in common except for their interoperability with Ferrum Network.

### Interoperability by Design

Ferrum Network's sophisticated solutions simplify the complexity of building a multi-chain solution and give developers and project owners a single entry point to every recognizable chain and network in the industry. We have thought about the pain points that arise when implementing interoperability as an afterthought in a multi-network / multi-chain world. With an ever-growing list of new EVM and non-EVM compatible chains coming to market, gaining traction, and providing value to segments of the global crypto audience, interoperability has become a core value for most projects. At Ferrum Network, we design from the ground up for interoperability.

### **Developability — Making life easier for developers**

> “Although developability is critical for blockchain platforms, it is not often discussed. We think about usability a lot when we talk about product design, however for application platforms developability is the most important thing to attract developers to get apps built and put onto the platform.” **** — [@Polkadot](https://twitter.com/polkadotnetwork)&#x20;
>
> Source: [How Polkadot tackles the biggest problems facing blockchain innovators](https://link.medium.com/o1goC1nazlb)

#### Why Should You Care?

As a developer, you no longer need to figure out architectural problems that come from launching your dApp, game, or metaverse on an EVM-compatible network like Polygon and providing seamless integration to a non-EVM compatible network like Solana.

Build the core solution on Ferrum Network and leave the complexity of seamless multi-chain integration to the underlying technology. Ferrum Network lets you implement interactions that enable the multi-chain transfer of value, data, and functional components. All of this is compiled and presented to the end-users in a seamless experience.

Ferrum Network's sophisticated interoperability protocols allow you to engage audiences across the spectrum regardless of their core stack, consensus mechanism, or runtime environment. As a developer, you can accomplish this without having to learn about the nuances of deploying your dApp or game on each of these individual networks. Gain mastery over one protocol, Ferrum Network, and access every network where your audience natively engages.

## Old

The name Ferrum is the Latin term for Iron. We chose the name Ferrum due to Iron's ability to fuse with and form a limitless variety of materials essential for the sustenance of life itself. We feel our mission is homogeneous to these characteristics of element 26.  At Ferrum Network we are building solutions that conform to a variety of complex protocols, many of which have nothing in common except for their interoperability with Ferrum Network.

Teams building solutions today are regularly forced to compromise on the benefits of a truly multi-network ecosystem. Even projects that have deployed their token, and dApps on multiple networks continue to have a siloed experience for their community, holders, and development process.

Polkadot's architecture of a primary relay chain with interconnected parachains solves the infrastructure side of this problem for those within the Polkadot ecosystem. However, for everyone else not part of the Polkadot ecosystem, there is still no viable solution. Ferrum Network is able to solve the problem of interoperability of value and data for any network, including parachains, EVM compatible networks, non-EVM compatible networks, or any other variation in the future.
