architecture/core-tech/ferrum-runtime.md, before:

---
description: Chain maximalism is so 2017! It's time to build a multi-chain future together.
---

# Ferrum Runtime

### Background and Overview

The value proposition and use case for Ferrum's mainnet has evolved since Ferrum's inception in 2018. As the crypto landscape evolves, the team at Ferrum Network has dedicated tremendous effort to ensure that the Ferrum Network mainnet continues to adapt and evolve to provide limitless utility and value to all stakeholders.&#x20;

### Joining Polkadot’s Bet Against Blockchain Maximalism

> The days of [chain maximalism](../glossary-and-acronyms/glossary.md#chain-maximalism) are over. Ferrum Network believes in a multi-chain future and is joining [Polkadot in their bet against blockchain maximalism](https://cointelegraph.com/news/gavin-wood-polkadot-is-a-bet-against-blockchain-maximalism). Ferrum Network was founded on the basis of an interoperable world; we believe an alignment with the Polkadot ecosystem is the ideal next step in our journey to help make blockchain interoperability as seamless as a MetaMask transaction.
>
> – [Taha Abbasi](https://www.linkedin.com/in/tahaabbasi/), Chief Strategy Officer at Ferrum Network

### Ferrum Network Tech Stack Overview

![Ferrum Network Mainnet Tech Stack Overview v0.1.8](<../../.gitbook/assets/Ferrum Network Mainnet Tech Stack Overview v0.1.8.gif>)

### Why Polkadot?

#### Mission Alignment

Text

#### Why Reinvent The Wheel - Early Chain Attacks

Text Early Chain Attacks

#### Substrate

Text

### Stack Overview

Brief of VCPR, QP, MCV

Ferrum intends to bring the power and benefits of Polkadot and its cousin Kusama to the rest of the world. Polkadot's has proven the importance and demand of their core [_HETEROGENEOUS MULTI-CHAIN FRAMEWORK_](https://polkadot.network/PolkaDotPaper.pdf) __ with incredible adoption and a fast-growing market cap that has surpassed $35.5 Billion, and is in the Top 10 coins by market cap as of 29-November-2021. Ferrum Network is bringing this amazing core technology to address the problems faced by every project in crypto with a combined potential market size to be addressed currently valued at $2.57 Trillion and growing.

Commit message:

GitBook: [#43] Why Polkadot - Mission Alignment

architecture/core-tech/ferrum-runtime.md, after:

---
description: Chain maximalism is so 2017! It's time to build a multi-chain future together.
---

# Ferrum Runtime

### Background and Overview

The value proposition and use case for Ferrum's mainnet has evolved since Ferrum's inception in 2018. As the crypto landscape evolves, the team at Ferrum Network has dedicated tremendous effort to ensure that the Ferrum Network mainnet continues to adapt and evolve to provide limitless utility and value to all stakeholders.&#x20;

### Joining Polkadot’s Bet Against Blockchain Maximalism

> The days of [chain maximalism](../glossary-and-acronyms/glossary.md#chain-maximalism) are over. Ferrum Network believes in a multi-chain future and is joining [Polkadot in their bet against blockchain maximalism](https://cointelegraph.com/news/gavin-wood-polkadot-is-a-bet-against-blockchain-maximalism). Ferrum Network was founded on the basis of an interoperable world; we believe an alignment with the Polkadot ecosystem is the ideal next step in our journey to help make blockchain interoperability as seamless as a MetaMask transaction.
>
> – [Taha Abbasi](https://www.linkedin.com/in/tahaabbasi/), Chief Strategy Officer at Ferrum Network

### Ferrum Network Tech Stack Overview

![Ferrum Network Mainnet Tech Stack Overview v0.1.8](<../../.gitbook/assets/Ferrum Network Mainnet Tech Stack Overview v0.1.8.gif>)

### Why Polkadot?

#### Mission Alignment

Polkadot set out to build a multi-chain world with their [_HETEROGENEOUS MULTI-CHAIN FRAMEWORK_](https://polkadot.network/PolkaDotPaper.pdf)_._ Ferrum is a strong believer and proponent of Polkadot's bet against chain maximalism. We feel that Ferrum's mission aligns perfectly with Polkadot's core ethos. We also believe that the DotSama community is ideally suited to undertake the task of creating, adopting, and standardizing interoperability across chains. For these reasons, we feel the DotSama ecosystem is the ideal and nurturing environment for the inception and growth of Ferrum's blockchains.

#### Why Reinvent The Wheel - Early Chain Attacks

Text Early Chain Attacks

#### Substrate

Text

### Stack Overview

Brief of VCPR, QP, MCV

Ferrum intends to bring the power and benefits of Polkadot and its cousin Kusama to the rest of the world. Polkadot's has proven the importance and demand of their core [_HETEROGENEOUS MULTI-CHAIN FRAMEWORK_](https://polkadot.network/PolkaDotPaper.pdf) __ with incredible adoption and a fast-growing market cap that has surpassed $35.5 Billion, and is in the Top 10 coins by market cap as of 29-November-2021. Ferrum Network is bringing this amazing core technology to address the problems faced by every project in crypto with a combined potential market size to be addressed currently valued at $2.57 Trillion and growing.
